[Music]
Entire factories loaded onto trains
On June 22, 1941,
the German Wehrmacht invades the
Soviet Union. Thousands of wagons bring
machines and workers to the east
away from the
[Music]
front. Operation Barbarossa, the
code name of the attack, relies on the
strategy of the
blitzkrieg based on surprise  and
speed the Red Army is
overrun the German troops advance
towards Ukraine and Belarus into
the rich industry and
agricultural areas in these western
republics a large part
of the economy is located the survival of the
Soviet Union is at
stake but how can it wage war
when the factories are in  in which guns
tanks and ammunition are produced
fall into the hands of the enemy
Stalin makes a radical decision
the war-related industry is to be
dismantled and rebuilt out of the reach of
Hitler's army
a bold
plan how can this succeed within a few
months armaments
factories and raw material depots specifically the
entire Soviet  To resettle the war economy,
to reorganize and in the
end to produce more weapons than the
German
Reich. It is the Soviet people who
save the USSR from defeat, the soldiers at the front
of course but also the
civilian population, workers, engineers,
technicians, women and men, fleeing with
the machines  in order to set up a second front further to the east,
an army of ordinary people who
will fight for victory in the factories far from the theaters of war [music] Stalin is surprised by the German
offensive
just one day after the attack on
June 23rd, he decides to relocate the most important
large factories
No country has ever done anything comparable before.
Above all, the
war-related industries need to be
secured, the steel and metal industry,
the production facilities for tanks,
aircraft, ammunition, as well as the power plants
and the coal, ore and wheat
warehouses, while the Wehrmacht
advances ever further, trains and trucks have to
be found, factories have to be dismantled
and  Workers
are being transported the Soviets are
improvising the front is getting
closer every hour the economic heart of the USSR is
threatened
the losses would be enormous the Baltics
Belarus and the Ukraine are home to
a third of the industrial production
half of the agricultural and two
thirds of the
steel production a rolling mill for
armored steel in the  Ukrainian Mariupol is
the first factory whose relocation is planned
but where will the facilities be
rebuilt
[Music]
Representatives of the tank production
of the Leningrad Kirofwerk travel to the
Urals to look for a suitable location
[Music]
Moscow hopes that the enemy
invasion like others before  The Soviet population would also fail due to the
immeasurable expanse of the country
[music]
The Soviet population
had not expected the attack.
They did not know how to deal with it.
Everywhere it was said that the German
fascists are here. Now action must be taken. It was not
until July 3rd that Stalin shouted in
a radio speech  the Soviet
people stood together and pushed the enemy
back,
he called
them brothers and sisters, it was one of the few times that
Stalin acted so familiarly. He was
heard everywhere. This speech made it
clear to people that they had to fight
and that this war affected everyone
[music  ] The
aim of the German
eastern campaign is the conquest and
exploitation of new living space as the
Nazis
called it. Hitler wants access to
resources that the Reich lacks.
Raw materials and wheat for the homeland
for German
settlers. The aim is to wipe out the population of
Ukraine and Belarus.
The Jews are to be murdered
the Slavs are enslaved or
driven to starvation
Minsk Smolensk Kiev and
today's Ukrainian Hakev within D
months German soldiers conquer the
important
economic centers and every time
their troops get closer
the factories disappear, huge
production facilities that are indispensable for the war are
put on the
rails Steel  Airplane tanks and
gun works are
dismantled They produce until the last
moment then the machines are
loaded For a large system it takes
up to 1000 wagons spread over
several hundred
trains Often the workers go with them
[music] It
was a challenge for the
transport system that yes  Also
used to relocate the troops, those responsible had to
consider how, for example, the factories in Kiev
should continue to operate in order to contribute to the
defense of the city and
when it was time to evacuate them in order to
protect production. Such
individual decisions, which were often
made within a day,
made the success
People's Commissar Lasar
Kaganovic is responsible for the evacuation of this operation. He writes in his memoirs
that there was panic, there was no
mobilization plan, and no
transport was planned to carry out such an
extensive and hasty evacuation,
but
300,000 wagons were already available in July 1941
[music]
Imagine the moment when
the factory director says
production will stop, everything will be dismantled.
At that point,
gunfire could already be heard, the wagons
were ready and the workers began to
load the machines.
For the USSR it is a war of time
and space  The outcome is decided
at the front in bloody,
merciless battles but his
fate is also decided on the
rails. The industrial plants are
transported to the vastness of the Soviet Empire
with 22 million square kilometers, the
largest country in the world
[Music] Orders
went out in a wild mess.
Trains were requested. Trucks were ordered
to load everything away and to
unload it somewhere in Kazakhstan or Siberia the Soviets had never
thought of such an operation that they
got there anyway is remarkable
on the way anything could
go wrong trains were mixed up or
misrouted or lost because
there were no timetables for them
[applause]
or  But some political commissar
could decide, looking at the approaching
front, that there was a train that
could use fuel and machinery, apparently no one was
responsible for it, then we would take the stuff
now, so the train was looted and
the material was
confiscated and the factories were relocated
at high speed  only works thanks to the
Soviet
talent for improvisation, the chaotic
conditions are kept quiet by Stalinist
propaganda,
the USSR is invincible, the
Soviet hero dies at the front and
we never
go back. Of all the images that the regime
presents to the people, only
the feature film ordinary people deals with the
evacuation of the
factories  The script was
written in 1943 and was shot the following year.
The film reflects the fate of
millions of Soviet citizens who were resettled with their
aircraft in the Urals or Siberia.
The story of
Comrade Jaromin, who runs the
aircraft factory in Leningrad, is told
His factory to
Central Asia where he builds it up
and further aircraft
going to othe
othe
Nikolai
Vosnesensky Stalin's economist is in
charge of relocating industry v V goplan the state
committee for
economic planning he calls engineers
and technicians to the
Kremmel the metallurgical engineer Sergei
Yemelanov takes part in one of these meetings
and notes in his
diary when I arrived in the Kremmel
the meeting has already started
vnesjenski took the floor from now on
nickel is reserved for the production of
armor steel and steel for
guns we need 30,000 tons of
nickel where can we get these quantities
you are experts and
communists tell me what to do
chief planner wosnens member in  The
innermost circle of the government asks what
to
do, he turns directly to the
engineers without going through the
bureaucracy, the tone has changed, the
power center is under
pressure,
Vosnesjensky is directing the entire
Soviet economy towards a single
goal
a mighty river
in front of which suddenly
splits into one arm was the
mobilization immediately
hundreds of thousands of young men were drafted into the
army
many of them came from the
countryside from agriculture
at the same time the leadership knew that they
had to ramp up weapons production [music] and so they hired people as a whole
Civilian companies in the country switched their production from
sewing machines, bicycles and so on
to the production of various
armaments.
On the one hand, the
army was increased in the horuk process and
armaments production
increased, but on the other hand, there were
sectors of the economy that simply broke away
from the state leadership as orders rained down on them
Like thousands of factory directors, engineers
and workers, Comrade Jeromin tries to
perform miracles on site Sam
[music]
the title of the film, simple people, makes it
clear who it is about.
Neither the powerful
of the
regime nor exemplary workers or
heroic
soldiers are shown; the film tells much more about the
people  His will
to live and his
talent for improvisation made the relocation of the
factories successful
[Music] At the
end of July
1941, in just one month, Hitler's
troops advanced 300 km into Soviet territory.
The front now extends
over almost 1000 km from the Baltic States in the north
to the Black Sea in the
South under the grenades and bombs of the
Wehrmacht the relocation continues a
race against time
at some point you reach a train station
somewhere
inland there may be
wasteland there but no accommodation for the
workers no
electricity there may not even be
enough workers because there are some on
the  Drive off or had been
eliminated for other work.    lf
[Music]
In practice, the evacuation
becomes a gigantic
patchwork. Each factory has its own
story. At the end of August,
the tank production of the
Leningrad Kirofwerk finally finds a
new location. It is relocated to
Nisni Tagil, 500 km away.
In September
1941, the tank production is threatened  Front an important
locomotive factory in
Harkiv the only sensible alternative location
is also Nisni
Tagil the kiro factory has to set off again
this time it goes to
Chelljabinsk where it merges with a
tractor factory to produce tanks
[music]
on October 8th the
rainy season begins the streets are drowning in the
Mud At the beginning of November, the
German troops approach Moscow.
500 companies leave the city and
with them almost half of the
four and a half million
[music]
inhabitants. On December 5th the
Wehrmacht comes to a standstill just a few kilometers from the
Kremmel.
The winter is as the year
1941 is drawing to a close  The end of the Soviet Union has
not
collapsed, the Red Army laments
hundreds of thousands of deaths,
the great Russian poet Anna
Ahmatova
writes, you are no longer with the
living, you remain lying in the snow, 28
bayonet stitches, five bullet wounds, a
sad robe I sewed for my friend.
Blood loves her and always blood our
Russian
earth after 6  Months of blitzkrieg are devastating not
only the humanitarian but also the
economic balance. The Hitlerites are
now occupying the areas
that just accounted for half of the
Soviet steel and
agricultural production.
Intoxicated by their
military successes, the
Nazis do not recognize the dimension of the
Soviet
strategy. 220 factories were built in the
Caucasus  relocated 660 to the Urals 240
to the West 80 to Eastern Siberia and 300
to Kazakhstan and
Central Asia as a whole managed to
relocate more than 1500 companies 13%
of the country's industrial production
in some of them production has
already
started again the Red Army
continues to receive tanks, aircraft and
guns  Ammunition
The curve of armaments production during
the war is
impressive, it is reminiscent of
Table Mountain in South Africa, it rises steeply
to a plateau and stays there
until the end of the war. Only in the winter of 41
does the upswing stagnate, on the one hand because
the other sectors of the economy are idle,
but also because the
Production capacities in the
western areas are either in
enemy hands or on the rails.
The Soviet Union owes the
salvation of its wartime factories to the courage of the
population. Alexander W. One of the
few Western journalists who were on site in 1941
reported that I had
the opportunity to work with many workers during the war
talk about the men and women who were
sent to the Urals or Siberia in the autumn or early winter months of 1941,
how entire industries and with them
millions of people were relocated in a very short time
and under the most difficult conditions,
how these
factories managed to increase their production
considerably  everything shows
an incredible
[music]
tenacity in most places there
were terrible
conditions there was often a lack of
[music]
food people worked because they
knew there was no other way they
worked 12 13 sometimes 14 or 15
hours a day without regard to
losses  They knew that their work had
never been more important than
now. Many people died in the process.
The people in the Soviet Union
had a terrible decade
behind them. Terror, deportations,
executions, purges in the party in the
economic apparatus. They were used to
getting through somehow. The war at least had
the advantage  that they knew that the
enemy was not their own but a
foreign state
whose army brought death and suffering to their
country.
Basically, the war was,
at least for the civilian population, an
extension of the suffering of an
economy under
war conditions that had de facto been in place
since the 1930s
Why the people
endured the situation without complaint and without protests They had gotten used
to the privations in the 10 years before the war
In the late 1920s Stalin had
imposed a series of F year plans
to advance the industrialization of the
Soviet Union
within a few years
grow in Magnitogorsk Chilyarbinsk  and
niepretrrovsk huge industrial complexes are springing up
from the ground
[music]
it is a centrally controlled
planned economy that is implemented with all the rigor
the plan is not a forecast but
primarily a steering and
control instrument throughout the country
utopian goals are set
in every workshop in the factories offices
collective farms  On the street in the
shops everywhere the same
posters - it's about
outdoing yourself, overfulfilling the plan.
Stalin wants to create a new
society, an army of
workers who are supposed to
produce more and more
[music] in the factories and on the streets
[Music]
[Applause]
In the 1930s, politics and the
economy are characterized by an
omnipresent
war. War not only in the classical
sense
but as a mobilization of
society  which has warlike features, we
are talking about the
work front of soldiers of
industrialization if, for example, a worker
leaves the company without permission he is considered a
deserter
the USSR is a fortress besieged by the
enemy therefore every economic
development is above all the development of
military
strength both are inseparable from each other
[  Music]
Verb the regime glorifies war
and
in the 1930s Soviet
society was already mobilized
outward against capitalism and
imperialism inwardly against the
enemies of the system, which was at
war with its own people who were being
re-educated and liberated from their opponents
Agriculture was
forced to be collectivized from 1929 onwards. From now on
the farmers had to hand over their harvest to the state.
Food for the new
workers who worked voluntarily or
involuntarily in the Soviet
factories.
Collectivization and
industrialization claimed millions
of lives and led to a
fundamental transformation of
society in the 1930s  Despite difficult living conditions,
the vast majority of Soviet citizens had
the feeling of witnessing the
emergence of a new world, a world called
socialism. This did not mean that they
shared all the values of the regime; rather, it was the vision of a
progressive world under construction that
united them and was the core of
society  Consensus
was formed by those who survived the terror of the
1930s and
went through a tough school
[music]
now this people who are used to
enduring everything between June and
December
1941 also have to endure the chaos of the evacuation.
Protests are rare but
they do exist in the mechanical engineering works  in hakiv,
7,000 of 12,000 workers refuse to go to the
Urals
in ivanovo a center of the
textile industry 200 km northeast of
Moscow local officials report
an uprising of the common
people report from November 2,
1941 on anti-Soviet unrest in the
ivanovo region strictly
confidential in the weaving factory
Groups formed that shouted that they should take the
machines with them and leave us without work.
The directors have left the city
and we will give up. We
forbid you to dismantle the machines.
The worker Kulakova said not
Hitler is taking our bread, but
our bosses are sending it to him  do
n't give us any more bread keep it for
yourself the worker lobova said we
are hungry we can no longer
work in a country where heroism
and enthusiasm are decreed by the state it is
extremely risky
to publicly
express anger or resistance unrest is therefore rare and does
not last  long but the population
is deeply insecure because of the
continued defeats of the Red
Army and is worn out in the chaos that
reigns throughout the country. The propaganda has a lot to
do, it has to dispel doubts and
keep morale high at the front and in the
hinterland  all possible
channels the press the art the
literature posters and of course the
cinema in this system the cinema plays
a special
[music]
role right from the start the film industry has priority
films are shown further
the cinema was not a leisure activity
but an indispensable weapon very
quickly in the summer  In
1941, the first filmmakers were
given the task of
producing films that mobilized the population
and at the same time
reported on the crimes of the enemy at the end of 1991
[Music]
The film studios are
no longer safe in Moscow and Leningrad and are being
relocated like the
armaments factories. Director Serge
Eisenstein lands with his team in the
Kazakh capital
and shoots
the second part of Ivan der in the improvised studios of Mossfilm
[Music]
terrible with Ivan the Terrible,
a protagonist was chosen who belonged to a
distant past,
an era that was discredited in the
early days of the Soviet Union,
but now this figure was useful because
he had united Russia because this
Ivan was militarily successful and
defied the West  and
thereby promoted the emerging Soviet
patriotism during the Second
World War
[music]
instead of underpinning this war with Marxist
doctrines,
Stalin, with his
great speech of July 3,
1941, had the political genius to place him in the
ranks of the great patriotic wars of
eternal Russia
The Gaelic leadership had changed its
rhetoric, the fight was no longer for
communism but for the
survival of the homeland and holy
Russia, the fight against Hitler
Germany became the Great
Patriotic War
[music]
the propaganda shows its effect whether for
the state the holy  Fatherland or
Mother Russia the Soviet people
are fighting their resistance is
unparalleled
[music]
At the end of
1941 the country is on the verge of
[music]
collapse that doesn't stop Stalin from
ordering the construction of a strategically important railway line from Stalingrad to the north
[music]
on the Blitzkrieg  A new phase follows
that will last a long time.
Stalin has a huge
territory, an empire with far-
flung borders and countless
[music]
people, resources that make it possible to
counter the German invasion
[music]
the Nazis rely on quick offensives aimed at
closing in on the enemy
[Music], on the other hand,
continuously overcome
industrial production
[music]
hl  Te
es
For the locals at the new
locations, they do
the hardest, most dangerous
work. They are the first to die of
hunger. They receive
no training and often don't speak
Russian. The problem was the lack of
men. Many fought  at the front
were dead or had been captured by the Germans,
but a
base of skilled workers was needed for the
war machine.
A large part of the work had to be
done by women who were hastily drafted into war work
and assigned in a fast-track procedure.
Young people 14
15 16 year olds also worked in 10 hour
shifts  in the
factories and
[music]
so all work on average 9 hours a
day days a
week the work is
organized militarily and is monitored not
showing up late and
negligence are
punished A decree of December 26, 1941
punishes unauthorized removal from the
workplace with 5 to  8 years
[music]
Camp others have to do forced labor,
especially the gulak
prisoners, criminal
oppositionists, potato thieves, unlucky people
who made a joke about Stalin,
Catholics, Muslims and
Protestants, the camp inmates are an
available mass for the hard work
in the extraction of raw materials such as coal and
wood and on the construction sites
[Music]
the forced recruitment of
workers is paying
off the good news for the Red
Army was that war production was in
full swing,
several thousand
aircraft and tanks, thousands of guns,
millions of rifles and grenades could
be delivered every month, the acute shortage of war equipment
was
born in June  In
1942, a year after the invasion,
the Germans launch a second
blitzkrieg offensive southwards
on Baku and its oil fields.
The Soviet troops are
pushed back 400 km. Sebastopol Voronezh
Rostov. Important cities fall into the
hands of the
enemy. The
armaments factories are relocated again, some even
for the second
time  before
Stalingrad but the USSR has not yet been
defeated.
In the fall of
1942, the Soviet Army is
still retreating from the
advancing German troops, especially
in the
south, but it is no longer lacking in
ammunition. It is noteworthy that the
Soviet economy started up again in 1942
At least the war-related industry
recovered so quickly that
by the end of the year the Soviets were producing more aircraft,
tanks and other weapons
than the
Germans. The USSR wins its
first victory over Hitler. Germany is highly industrialized in
the production of its opponents
Tered make the
product
ins ^  uit
[Music]
one -off activity in the stical
war industry was the mass production
[Music]
had to be simplified because the
groh  They were unskilled workers, they needed
easy-to-understand tasks, many
couldn't even
read instructions and the solution was assembly lines and
mass production, both of which the
Soviets had learned in the 1920s and early
1930s from US engineers who
had helped build up the industry and now they had a kind of
Soviet Fordism
global
war production in the Second World War,
only two countries
really mastered mass production, the
Soviet Union and the
USA, there were approaches to it in Great Britain and Germany,
but they were
not fully developed, only
mass production enabled an enormous increase in
productivity, without a doubt,
the mass production
of Soviet armaments brought about
194243 the turning point in the fight against the
Germans
1942 the Battle of
Stalingrad begins the German troops back
on the city
in front of the journalist and author Wasid
Grossmann is a contemporary witness and writes in
his novel Life and
Fate two masses one in the north
the other in the south million tons
Metal and flesh waited for the
signal
[Music]
Mass production
Mass death Stalin refuses to
evacuate the population
months of urban warfare
begins Soviet industry can
now supply the Red Army with enough
ammunition, rifles and tanks
The Wehrmacht, on the other hand, lacks
weapons, fuel and
food, the economic  and the
military balance of power between
the warring parties has reversed.
The Soviets now produced enormous
quantities of war material and were able to
build up huge reserves. Without this, the
Stalingrad cauldron and the debacle of the
German army might not have
happened. The prices for ammunition
for weapons, tanks or fighter planes
had fallen drastically
during  food prices
skyrocketed, there was a massive
shift in relative prices and
costs. In 1942, bread was unaffordable for the
starving population.
Weapons, on the other hand, were cheap
and plentiful. To
produce bread,
millions of
workers were needed in a highly
unproductive agriculture
a significantly smaller number could
produce ever larger quantities of ammunition
it was as if there were two
opposing economic systems in
one
country the propagandist posters show
haggard
faces everything for the front
never before has a slogan corresponded so much to
the
reality the war devours all
resources money raw materials workers
and
[  Music]
[Applause]
Food A two-headed
economic monster is born On the
one hand, a war
economy reaches peak production levels. On the other hand, a civilian economy that is completely down and running on the back burner.
The radical focus on the war
is plunging the hinterland into the
[Music]
famine that most people had
not enough to eat due to the
Soviet practice of allocating
food rations according to the
production system
[music],
i.e. a director or
engineer got more than a
skilled worker, who got more than a
skilled worker, who in turn got more than
an unskilled worker, and so
on, everyone tried to
survive somehow and the  To alleviate the greatest need through
barter,
those who
had been able to save a few belongings parted with them piece
by piece and
were employed in agriculture
where there was a little more to eat,
but there was hunger everywhere in the USSR
in factory number 200 in
Chelyabinsk, writes the
union leader  The
company doctor
is also an increasing number of cases of
vitamin deficiency and edema caused by protein deficiency,
which lead to a high rate of
illness and mortality,
especially among single
men in the sleeping barracks.
If measures are not
taken quickly to improve the diet of the
working people, the situation will be
catastrophic
[  Music]
the famine began in the autumn of
1941 after the harvest could no longer be harvested in the western areas.
From
1942 onwards, Soviet agriculture was
limited to a much smaller area, some of the
most important
granaries were missing, the rural population was
almost only able to build and old and
it  There were no chemical
fertilizers, the situation was
devastating. Between 1940 and 1942,
agricultural production fell by
two thirds This is why you
have to wait and see what you want
For many civilians, the factory was
more than just a workplace during the war, it
was their
life here, they got food, found
company and often they slept there too
had to suffer from the desolate food situation and the shortage of goods the factory became the
center of life for the workers
[Music]
1942 was a dangerous time for the
Soviet economy the army was in
retreat the capital stock shrank
not only because of the invasion but also because
it was not replaced in
itself  In the areas still controlled by the Soviets
there was zero
investment
built or rebuilt but the
stocks continued to decline
and people were starving, that is,
the population decreased because more
people died than
were born, so you can say that this
economy was on the verge of
collapse, that's what it is now  the
question of what
kept them going I GL diew
and naten numbers but in the
motivation of the
people after all the
Soviet and German economy
and industry were about the same
size what ultimately decides whether
victory or
defeat is a question of the
psychology of the morality of the people  Attitude
[music]
a real mystery of the Soviet
war economy is how the Soviet
people were able to endure
conditions that the German British or
Americans would not have endured for a minute.
A stroke of political genius by
Stalin and his
leadership elite was in fact to
make concessions and a series
of local  To allow activities
initi, for example, in collective
agriculture where the collective farmers
took back several million hectares of land in order to
cultivate it. It is also known that
a parallel market
developed, a black market, which secured
a significant part of the supply, especially in small towns
[Music]
[Music].
In the country, the farmers are beginning to dream of a
return to individual farming
[Music]
Religion is no longer
forbidden Marriages before God are
allowed again Stalin needs the Orthodox
Church to strengthen Russian patriotism
[Music]
for artists like the poet
Anna Ahmatova and the  Composer Dmitri
Shostakovt loosens the
censorship and Leonid Trauber
directs the film. Ordinary people
can write their scripts in this more liberal climate.
[Music]
the lack, the fragmentation, the
distance from the
centers of power, all of this led to
the Maer films  The
writers, culture and media people
as a whole were able to find loopholes or, let's say,
freedom,
not necessarily to tell
counter-narrative but at least different
versions of the official representation
In February
1943, the
encircled Wehrmacht soldiers surrendered to the
troops in Stalingrad  Red
Army Alexander Wert testifies to the horror
in the trenches. Layers of
green German and gray Russians frozen in ice
and fragments of human shapes
everywhere. Russian and German helmets lay
between the
brick rubble. It's unimaginable how
anyone could have survived here. The
Soviet troops advance to the
west and begin the lost
territories  to conquer back
[applause]
[music]
a core problem in waging a
total war on a large scale and
World War II was a total war
with millions of soldiers is
supplying the
troops making sure that you
have enough food enough weapons ammunition
explosives for that you have to  transporting supplies
from the factory to the front,
you have to feed the troops
so that they can continue fighting.
Logistics is the be-all and end-all
and Stalingrad was a logistically
extreme case for the Germans.
As the period of bad weather began, it became
increasingly difficult for the Soviets to supply the soldiers on this
front
On the other hand,
rail traffic was maintained and
in the end they sent 50% more trains with
supplies to the Stalingrad front than
the Germans
[music]
after Stalingrad the Soviet Union is
industrially and militarily
superior to the enemy, it now has twice as many
soldiers, four times as many cannons and
six times as many  many tanks like the
German
Reich, it is the Soviet soldiers,
the civilian population and the engineers
who brought about this success,
but Stalin's great
patriotic war is also a
world war, the USSR receives material
support from its
allies Great Britain and especially
the
USA as early as November 41,
Washington promises  Moscow free
aid deliveries that
start immediately the convos take the
northern route over the Northern Sea to
Achangelsk the southern route around Africa through
Iran and the Caspian Sea or they
come from the east via
Vladivostok this so-called Land Leas
program will continue until the end of the war
Land Le supplemented the
available resources
1942 around 5 1943 44 around
10% I don't know that sounds like a lot or a
little, it seems to me that there was a lot of
material and aid that
came in from outside. They definitely contributed to
reducing the considerable death rates
relieved the strain on the
Soviet
war effort, American
armaments aid supplemented the war material
of the Soviet Army. The Katuscha
rocket launchers, the so-called
Stalin organs, were often mounted on American
Studebaker chassis,
on tanks and aircraft
Cornet beef was made
of pork,
the
salvation was touonka in American cans
with curillic
labels. At some point the cans were
available in such quantities that the
soldiers could even supply the hinterland with them.
A war is not waged with money
but with resources. We look
at where from  The resources of the Soviet
war economy came from the
war factories from the farms from the army
rations of the country.
Help the soldiers left the factory and
workbench, put on the uniform and went
to
war, but all of these things cost money. Their
financing had to be secured so
that they didn't
collapse  The war budget of the
Soviet Union consisted partly of
taxes that were still levied in peacetime,
but now in
wartime civilian
economic activity was much lower
and so was
tax revenue, so they borrowed money
from the population
in quotation marks because these
loans were nothing more than
compulsory taxes  When the Soviet
worker collected his wages at the end of the week, it was said that
we would keep a part of it,
that is your contribution to the victory.
Congratulations, you have acquired a war bond.
Two years after Hitler's attack,
this is becoming more and more noticeable. The
USSR's war economy is in
full swing with one  With a huge contingent
of battle tanks, the Red
Army managed to recapture Kursk in July 43 and Rarkiv in August
[music]
the Soviet generals can now
carry out major operations in conjunction with tank units, artillery and air force, the constant supply of guns
and grenades enables
the artillery to close the defensive lines
Breaking up and
supporting the victories of the Red Army
call for a high price of
human life and
[music]
t
hus
[music]
the Soviets didn't need heavy
expensive tanks like the German Tiger
which was complicated and required skilled personnel
what they needed were large
quantities of easy-to-operate
standard tanks like the T34
[music]
the T34 is simply built robustly maneuverable
and well
armored  its engine has a limited
lifespan just long enough for a
tank in
battle the key to
mass production is the limitation
to little. In
1943 44 the Germans built 40 or 50
different
fighter aircraft in the Soviet Union,
on the other hand, they concentrated on three
or four types of aircraft and produced
them in  Very large
number of mass production
made it possible to
organize factories and to simplify the production processes,
as the Americans
did at the time
[music] hof husures  ives     supper
ures
Hakiv Mariupol Smolensk
Kiev until
1943, the Soviet troops will conquer two
thirds of the occupied areas back
with the reconquest of Kiev in November
43, half of the Ukraine was again
taken over and reconstruction could
begin. The regime's primary goal was
reindustrialization, the
re-Sovietization of the reconquered
republics, on the one hand as a symbol but
also because historically they
had the most important industries,
Ukraine, Belarus, the
Baltics, the question was whether to keep
the old factories and machines in Kiev or Kiev
should rebuild or completely new ones in order to
provide the suffering republics with the best Soviet know-how. This is what has
been done. Some of the factories in Siberia,
Kazakhstan and the Urals remain in
operation. They contribute to the
economic upswing in the
Soviet
empire's
many workers and theirs, far away from Moscow  Families,
on the other hand, make their way
home when victory was finally in sight,
many Soviet citizens who had
worked and fought tirelessly for this victory thought
they would be rewarded in
some way for their efforts
[music]
They believed that the system
would loosen up and communist terror
would subside  would that their lives
would be better with more
consumer goods simply that the regime
would treat them better because they had
given everything they had been disappointed
[music]
Stalin rules again with an iron hand,
puts an end to any hope of freedom
with unchanged brutality,
the regime returns to a centralized
planned economy
[Music]
back again, all
production quantities, whether in the
wheat fields in the armaments or
toothbrush factories in Moscow, are
set and planned for 5 years
again the individual is supposed to drown in the
mass
[Music] rektor
and
the touching and sometimes cheerful
individuality  of the common people disturbs those in
power the film is
banned [applause] the party was not
visible enough in the film who do we see
instead society and
a society that
organizes itself, that takes its fate into its own
hands, that shows solidarity and works together
pulls without being
controlled and directed by the party
and while that
may still have happened in 1943,
now in 1945 it is something completely
impossible, it contradicts the
dominant ideology, that is the
problem, it contradicts the image of
communism and that is not reason enough
only to demand changes
but ultimately to ban it completely
[music]
society should stay out of
politics
[music]
politics is the job of
those who govern and that is the
party the party determines
society must obey and follow
[music]
avor
el is great simple people you could also translate it with
ordinary people,
but that has a little
different  Meaning simple people that
best meets the Russian equivalent
Solidarity helped the country to victory In
1945, this
representation of course clashes with the
official
discourse because at this point in time
Stalin claims all the credit for
the victory for
[music]
the last big
slaughter in April
1945 in Berlin
Instead of the Red Army,
Romania has already liberated Poland and Bulgaria,
two unequal opponents are facing each other
on the Soviet side,
two and a half million men,
6,250 tanks and 41,000
artillery pieces on the German side, 1
million soldiers,
1,500 tanks and 9,300
guns, the Third Reich goes under
the USA, the Soviet Union and
Great Britain  divide the world among
themselves
[music]
for Stalin and other leaders of the
Soviet republics the war was a
test for the communist
system if Hitler had taken over the Soviet Union in 1941
42 communism would have
fallen but they won victory in 1945
and I think that was the one for Stalin
Proof that in the end his system
was the superior one
[applause]
Stalin is the winner of the Great
Patriotic War the
SSR expands its power in Eastern Europe
the Soviet regime grows stronger and
devoted to the person of the
[music]
dictator the triumph is overwhelming
but the numbers are
frightening  Millions of tons of
weapons produced Millions of
square kilometers captured Millions of
deaths The Soviet people are the big
losers of the Second
World War The Soviets paid for
victory in the Second World War with
unprecedented sacrifices
Millions of people died About an
eighth of the
pre-war population The figures are
known 10 million dead soldiers
34 million who were mobilized
plus 11 million direct civilian
victims and 5 million
indirect ones. Due to
excess mortality in the hinterland or the
birth deficit, the total comes
to 26 to 27
million, but the number of direct
war victims is around 21 million, 10
million soldiers and 11 million
civilians  is a wide
field that of the Soviet people was
indescribably large but in the end
it is not rewarded. In
1945 the common people are still starving,
still living in
inhumane conditions,
still working under the thumb of a regime
that shows no mercy for its
people. Looking back, it was only then  the trauma of
the
1905 revolution a great Russian trauma then
the trauma of the First World War then
the civil war which was in many
ways even more cruel followed by
famine then came Stalinist
industrialization and in 1932 the next
famine as a direct result of Stalin's
agricultural policy and
forced modernization and
1937  Then even more blood is shed due to
the great
terror, the more you
bite the pre-war dream, the less
severe the trauma of the Second
World War weighs, which is put into perspective.
Of course, the situation in 1945 was
terrible, but it was a consequence of the
many terrible events
that preceded it, I experienced how faces
pale  how fear stirs under eyes songs,
how pages carved in stone,
sorrow strikes sunken cheeks,
how black or blonde
curls suddenly look like silvery white metal,
the smile wavers on
submissive lips
[music]